Now that you have some intuition of how transaction costs arise,
let's discuss how to model transaction costs as a function of the trade.
Well, think about what's called a Linear Impact Model.
So we're looking for an independent variable that has an effect on a dependent variable.
The dependent variable is some measure that describes transaction cost.
As we saw in our prior discussion about temporary and permanent price impact,
the transaction cost comes from a change in the market price of the asset.
Next, let's think about the independent variable that drives the change in price,
and hence the transaction cost.
Based on our prior discussion,
it's fair to assume that the larger the trade,
the larger the impact on the market price.
But let's think about this for a moment.
If you trade $10,000 of a stock,
is that considered a large trade or a small trade?
You might want to know how many total dollars of that stock
were traded on that day by all market participants,
in order to decide whether $10,000 is a lot or a little.
If our trade makes up one-tenth of
one percent of the total dollars traded for that stock,
this might be considered a small amount.
If our trade makes up 10 percent of the total dollars traded for that stock on that day,
then they would be considered a large trade and would be more likely to affect the price.
So we can calculate the independent variable as
a fraction of total dollars traded that day.
We'll call this the trade size.
If we had execution data from market makers such as major banks,
we could estimate the slope of that line.
Since most of us don't have access to this data,
another way to find this slope is to look in academic papers,
especially ones where the researchers estimated this using real execution data.
A good estimate that we can use for our purposes,
is that each one percent of the average daily volume
traded moves the price by 10 basis points.
The cost in dollar terms is the percent change in price times the dollar amount traded.
Note that a Linear Impact Model gives
a readily understandable description of how trade impacts price.
There is also evidence to support a Square Root Impact Model.
That is to say, as trades get larger,
the impact on price is not as strong as one would expect from a Linear Model.